Morning, everybody.
Welcome to session 310,
Debugging and Tuning
Your Carbon Applications with Xcode.
If you do not want to
learn about debugging your
Carbon applications with Xcode,
now would be an excellent
time to deplane.
This is actually going to be a little
more focused on debugging than on tuning.
Robert Bodich did an
excellent presentation on the
performance tools yesterday,
and I saw three plugs in
sessions yesterday pointing
to custom data formatters,
so I've changed the content a
little bit to focus more on the
debugging and custom data formatting,
because most of the stuff that
Robert explained on tuning and
diagnostics applies just as
well to Carbon applications
as to Cocoa applications.
So if you missed that,
catch it on the DVD.
There's some excellent stuff there.
I want to talk about Carbon.
It's not just for Code Warrior anymore.
We've been designing Xcode so that
it's a great Carbon development
environment and putting a lot
of emphasis on Carbon debugging
in the debugging environment.
Panther and Xcode have some really
great tools built in to help you build
and debug your Carbon applications.
What you're going to learn in this
session today are some basic differences
between the Carbon debugging you may
be used to on Mac OS 9 with Mac's bug
and the Code Warrior IDE debugger.
And what you have in Mac OS X with
GDB and the Xcode debugger.
There are some techniques for using
GDB and Xcode to debug Carbon apps.
Some secrets that are hidden on
Apple's website in plain sight in a
file called Carbon Tips and Tricks.
If you haven't read it,
that's what I stole most
of this presentation from.
Some new features in Xcode that
you haven't seen before that aren't
on the web that are really cool.
That will not only allow you
to debug your application,
build custom debuggers
in your application,
but also see a lot of your familiar
Carbon data types right in the
debugger with no further ado.
And then some Carbon specific
performance and tuning tricks.
I have like one or two
slides on those like I said.
Let's go through the steps
in debugging and tuning.
This should be familiar to everybody.
First, you have to define your
quality and performance goals.
I think if you remember from
the Mac OS X presentation,
the way we got Safari so fast
was that we made no performance
regressions a requirement.
So if you really want to deliver
a performance application,
if you really want to deliver
a quality bug-free application,
all of the tools in the world won't help
you if you don't have the methodology
and the discipline to make sure that
the tools are used in the process.
So everything I'm going
to show you today,
it's great if you know it.
It's even better if you define a process
that makes sure that these get used.
For example,
distributing these custom data viewers
throughout your organization or building
them into your product build process,
rather than having them on
a per-engineer ad hoc basis.
You need to prep your
project for debugging,
and we're going to show you some
ways to set up some environment
variables and set up some build
settings to make your project more
debuggable that are Carbon specific.
Get your basic functionality working.
Run your app in the
debugger and isolate bugs.
Then when you get the bugs out,
run your app under the
performance analysis tools to
see if you've met your metrics.
And it's really pretty important
to make sure that your application
works before you really start to
use the performance tools on it,
because the performance tools
far prefer a running application
to a broken application.
And then you iterate
and iterate and iterate.
Your friend is GDB.
I know a lot of you don't believe that,
but GDB is the underlying
debugger in the Mac OS X system,
and it's really going to help you out.
Debugging without GDB on Mac OS X is like
debugging without Mac's bug on Mac OS 9.
You can get pretty far with
symbolic debugging and with the
debugging the IDE shows you,
but unless you know what's going
on down at the middle level,
you'll never really know what's
going on with your application.
So if you don't have any
familiarity with GDB,
you really should acquire some in order
to do great debugging on Mac OS X.
We're going to show you
some of the basics today,
and then some of the interactions
between the IDE and GDB.
The basic way to launch an application
in the debugger is from the terminal.
You issue the GDB command and
then the path to your application,
and you need to go into your
application and all the way down
into the package of your application,
the .app/contents/macos,
all the way down to the DYLD executable.
So this is people's first mistake
is they try to GDB the package,
GDB the executable.
Second thing you can do is just you
can attach to a running application.
Launch your application, launch GDB,
and then attach to it.
So you have two modes:
launch it inside GDB or attach
to it once it's running.
If you've used any other
command-line debugger,
the commands are conceptually
familiar even though they're
probably under different names.
B sets a breakpoint.
P displays a variable's value,
so you have to print variables
rather than just type expressions.
X examines memory,
and that's like DM in MaxBug.
C continues execution after a breakpoint,
and BT prints a backtrace.
If you're used to SC in MaxBug,
it's BT in GDB.
We're all grown-ups,
we can learn new two-letter acronyms.
What's great about GDB is that GDB,
while it's stopped in the inferior,
lets you evaluate expressions
and call functions within your
application or within the framework.
And this is very powerful,
and this is the first technique
we're going to show you,
is that there are a lot of debug-only
functions built into the Carbon framework
that let you figure out what's going
on in your Carbon applications in ways
you wouldn't normally be able to do.
Many of these fulfill roles that
were filled by D commands in MaxBug.
These are now,
instead of being in the development
environment or in the debugger,
they're built into the framework,
and you just invoke
them from the debugger.
It's a pretty long list,
but you can print debug info
for HI objects or window groups.
You can print the event queue
or watch events coming in.
You can print the menu lists or
menus or menu items or windows.
You can even flash the viz
region or the update region.
You can even see the time of
a window just to see what it
happens to be at this point.
These are all listed in the Carbon tips
and tricks document on the web,
which I'll point you to at the end,
so you don't have to scribble furiously
now and get the parameter list right.
But the point is,
you can call any of these from GDB while
you're paused in your application to see
what Carbon thinks your app is doing.
So to demo some of these,
I'm going to bring up
Chris Neville on keyboards.
We're going to start with an
application called Appearance Sample,
which is on your Xcode CD.
This copy of Appearance Sample has
been updated to build a native project.
And what we're going to do is
we're going to invoke it in GDB.
We're going to start it off
in GDB without using Xcode.
It's already been built.
And GDB loads and it
runs the application,
and there you go.
Now, to interrupt a running
application from GDB,
you just press Control-C,
and it stops it.
And there we go.
We're interrupted.
You can do a stack trace,
see where you are, things like that.
Now we want to ask Carbon what
a couple of things are going on.
So we're going to make the
debug print menu list call.
And we just do call void
debug print menu list,
paren paren,
and we see this is our menu list,
according to HIToolbox.
There you go.
And it shows the menu ref.
Chris is now going to do
debug print all window groups,
and he's going to get a hierarchical
list of all the window groups.
It's got the hex address,
and it's also got the
window group identifier.
This will be very helpful in going
back to your nib or going back to your
code and figuring out what windows
have been instantiated at any time.
Now he's going to
continue the application,
go back, open another window.
Go back, interrupt the application again.
Print the window list again,
and now you see the new
window is in the window list.
So this is a very helpful debugging
technique from GDB to figure out
what's going on in your application.
We can go back to the slides.
Thank you, Chris.
Now, I mentioned a little earlier about
preparing your application for debugging.
And there's a technique we use
inside Apple for the Carbon Framework
itself to prepare the debug
version of the Carbon Framework,
which I'll show you a little bit later,
which you can use in
any Carbon application.
It's built into Carbon.
There are two header files called
debugging.h and assertmacros.h,
which are part of the Carbon Framework.
And if you include the
Carbon Umbrella Framework,
you've got these macros defined
in your application right now.
All you need to do is turn them on.
Assertmacros.h, if you look at it,
is a whole list of asserts you
can throw in your application
on various conditions.
You can verify that
things are certain values.
things are not values.
You can make sure things are conforming,
things are non-zero.
Large number of macros you can
use just to make sure that your
data is what you want it to be.
And in your production builds,
they all fall out and are no-op.
So if you are considering using,
constructing a whole set of debug
macros that are in your debug builds
but fall out in your production builds,
we've already built them for you.
They're right there in assertmacros.h.
All you have to do is
define a preprocessor flag,
debug, set it to one,
and they're invoked.
And then there's an additional
preprocessor macro that's specified.
It specifies the level of debugging.
And we define four levels for you.
And they have different degrees
of precision and explanation and
verbosity on the debug strings.
If you set debug internal,
that gives you the source file
and the line number in which
the assertion has been thrown,
which is very useful
for internal debugging.
If you set debug external,
it just gives the assert and
the name of the string that
was associated with the assert,
so your users can report that back.
If you have debug break only,
then when an assert is thrown,
it just breaks into the debugger
and doesn't log a message.
And then if you say debug production,
then all of the asserts are silent.
And you can set these either
from the command line,
either in include files and header
files when you build your project,
or you can even set them in Xcode.
We'll show you a little
bit about that later.
There's a second thing,
like I said earlier,
the debug versions of
the Carbon libraries.
Every version of every Mako
library that we supply in a
framework comes in the developer
release with two parallel versions,
a debug version and a profiling version.
And the debug version has perhaps
additional calls and certainly
additional console logging of what's
going on inside that framework.
And if you build and link your
application with the debug variant,
when you make system calls,
then those system calls,
if you pass them bad values
or if there's a bad condition
somewhere in the framework,
it will do console spew.
This is very,
very useful and not enough people do it.
Again,
you can control this with an environment
variable if you're just running in GDB,
or you can control it with
a pop-up menu in Xcode,
and we'll show you how to do that.
One thing about using Xcode,
you have to turn off zero link in order
to use the debug variants of the library.
And that's what we're doing
with libraries right now.
Okay?
And so we'll bring Chris back up again
to show you a couple of these things.
So we're going to bring up the
appearance sample code in Xcode now,
and go to a file called MegaDialog.
That's right.
Go to the switch pane method.
And here's some, there's some crude error
checking going on here.
This isn't really very useful, you know,
if the input value is invalid,
then just do nothing.
Maybe we want to see when
that input value is invalid,
so we're going to put an assert here.
Just verify what that value is,
and that will cause a log message
if the pain index is zero.
Now that's all we type here.
The verify macro in assert
macros does the rest of the work.
Now to fire that off,
we go to our project settings.
Get the project inspector
and go to our build styles,
because we want the asserts only
in the development build style and
not in the deployment build style.
So we'll add, by clicking the little plus
box down at the corner,
an other_cflags.
and it moves,
so you need to go select it again.
Not that one.
That one.
And we're going to define the debug macro
equals 1 and debug_internal equals 1.
And then we're going
to build the project.
And by defining those,
we're going to activate those macros,
we're going to define, verify,
and it's going to run.
Well, not yet.
Not yet.
Build errors and warnings.
No, no, no, hang on, hang on.
Turn off zero, well...
[Transcript missing]
It's not spelled wrong.
It's, it's, it's, it's,
um... Build errors and warnings window.
It's the build dialogue.
CleanBuild.
It's a development release, folks.
GDB is also still
running the application.
That's okay.
Okay.
So now the application is
built with the debug flags.
He's going to run the application.
And when the application runs,
you see that the first time we call that,
we get an assert that
pain index equals 0.
It turns out this function is called
with pain index equals 0 a whole lot.
Now maybe that's a performance problem
or a logic problem in our application.
Maybe it's not,
but by just silently returning,
we'd never know.
But by throwing an assert there,
we get an interesting log to
figure out what's going on.
Now you notice a couple other
things about this is that it shows
you the name third party client.
Well, that's the default name.
There's another variable that
you can declare that's defined
in debugging.h that if you
assign that preprocessor macro,
it actually puts the
name of your application,
whatever you assign it in there,
into your log so you can
get better logging messages.
And since we did the
debug internal style,
we're getting the line number
and the source file in which
the assert's happening.
So these are built in.
They're very useful.
Now we need to quit the application,
and we'll show you building with the
debug version of the Carbon Library,
which generates a lot
more diagnostic output,
not just a single assert.
So what Chris is going to do here is go
down into the executable configuration,
and this configures what happens
when we run or debug our application.
And you see there's a pop-up menu that
says Dynamic Library Runtime Variant,
the default standard,
and we're going to set it to debug.
And that means when we link
our application and when
we run our application,
we're going to link and run it against
the debug variant of the library.
So if we build it and run it,
and open up the run log.
We see a whole lot of output from
the Carbon framework of interesting
things that this application,
this sample application that
Apple ships on the Developer CD as
an example of how to write code,
all of the wrong values that
it passes the Carbon framework.
So use this as a lesson.
This is really very useful if you want
to know what the framework is doing.
As you mouse around the
application and as we do things,
it generates even more asserts.
These are asserts using the assert
macros and using debugging.h that are
built into the Carbon framework that
are turned on in the debug variant.
Okay?
Thank you, Chris.
Now he showed you a little
bit of debugging with Xcode.
First we started out in GDB,
and then we did a little bit of GDB-style
text spewing from inside of Xcode.
Now we're going to show you a
little bit of Carbon debugging
interactively with the Xcode debugger.
The Xcode debugger is a lot better
than the Project Builder debugger was.
I hope you saw in a
couple of the sessions,
like yesterday afternoon,
some of the capabilities of it.
I'm going to go a little more in-depth
into some of the Carbon aspects of that.
Like any other IDE debugger,
it shows you the execution threads,
it shows you the stacks and
the backtraces where you
happen to be in the code.
It shows you the source code,
it shows you the local variables,
and it shows you the input parameters
of the functions in a way that
you can figure out what the values
are and what the variables are.
It also lets you set
and manage breakpoints.
There are some new
debugging features in Xcode.
We do C++ exception handling where
GDB and Project Builder did not.
This is going to be very useful if
you use C++ exceptions as a routine
part of your application structure.
We allow you to step through templates.
So templates can be really,
really gnarly,
and if you can't step through them,
step through instantiation
or use of them,
it's really, really hard to figure
out what's going on.
We do that now in Xcode.
We've got some built-in data viewers
for foundation data types and the most
important Carbon data types you use,
and it's an extensible
plug-in architecture where
you can define your own,
not just for Carbon data types,
but for application-specific
data types as well.
So now I'm going to
hand it over to Chris,
and he's going to do his demo
of C++ exceptions and the
stepping-through templates.
Okay.
So what we've got here
should look familiar to you
if you came to session 307.
This is the Power Plant appearance demo,
kind of the Power Plant version
of appearance sample that
we've imported into Xcode.
So let's just start this debugging.
Loads, runs.
Okay, so here it is.
Again,
just shows off the various controls,
various kinds of windows.
Hmm, this isn't working.
It's a bug.
How are you going to fix it?
How indeed.
Okay, so when this particular
type of bug happens,
I know from experience that it's usually
because someone is throwing an exception
and it's just being silently swallowed.
Now, stuff like this is pretty
hard to track down,
especially in something like Power Plant,
because quite often you didn't write
either the code that's throwing
or the code that's catching.
However, what we can do with Xcode is we
can pause and then turn on Stop on
C++ Throw and Stop on C++ Catch.
So we'll continue,
go back to Appearance Demo, and now, oh,
sure enough,
So there's the exception itself,
and it's coming from this function here,
throwIfNil, because I just set it to
nil to force an exception.
Power plant tends to not throw exceptions
unless something goes seriously wrong,
so that was the simplest way to do it.
So let's see where
that actually winds up.
We'll hit Continue,
and now we stop in the catch,
or actually we stop on the function
call that generated the exception,
process next event.
If we step over,
we'll wind up in the catch block itself.
So I also wanted to show off some
debugging of standard C++ library stuff
and C++ standard template library.
And to do that,
I actually wrote my own project because
Power Plant tends to not use this stuff,
which is fair because it was
created before they mostly existed.
So, what we have here is a fairly simple,
stupid STL.
Oh, I knew I was going to forget that.
Okay, there's a bug.
We're in, and now I have to... You have
to turn off Stop on Throw and
Catch before you run the debugger,
or the debugger won't run.
We'll fix that in time for GM.
All right, let's try that again.
Okay.
So here we are.
I've actually already
stopped at a breakpoint.
This is sort of your, you know,
STL 101 application.
It sucks a bunch of words
out of the system dictionary,
uppercases them, and then blats out a
few to standard output.
So we've stopped right here
on a call to four each.
I've already got a breakpoint
on the function that's going to
uppercase everything using transform.
So we'll step into that.
Okay,
so here we are stopped in uppercase.
And, you know,
we'd like to see the string
that we're operating on.
So, well, here it is.
It's S.
But if we expand it,
this is not really what I had in mind.
This is not exactly useful.
I want to see the string.
So, this is what custom
data formatters are for.
You've probably seen already how
you could use custom data formatters
to pick pieces out of a structure,
individual fields.
But you can also call a function.
So,
what we'll do here is we'll say var.cstr,
because standard library strings have a
handy thing that will return a C string.
And it's going to think
about that for a minute.
Really,
this didn't happen when I was practicing.
It worked great in rehearsal, folks.
It worked fine in rehearsal.
What's going on here?
Well, this is entertaining.
Yeah.
All right.
We're just going to... Well,
while Chris is doing that,
we'll go back to slides and explain
how the custom data formatters work.
The custom data viewers,
if you've seen them yesterday, Chris,
let me know when it's working.
Yep.
The custom data format is,
if you've seen them yesterday,
a simple functionality that has
three levels of implementation.
The simple functionality is
there's a summary column,
and you can type an expression
into the summary column,
and that expression is evaluated.
The basic syntax,
the basic thing you can do is
you can extract members from
a structure or a class and
display them in the summary view,
and you can put strings around them,
so you can say length equals this member,
height equals that member,
and that uses this percent sign notation,
percent member percent.
So anywhere you have a struct
or a class or an array,
you can use the percent sign
notation and get at things inside
that structure and promote them
to the summary of that structure.
That really helps you look at
a variable without having to
turn down the turn-down arrow,
especially if it's a very large thing.
It gets you a lot more data
density in your debugger view.
The second level is that you
can evaluate an expression,
and the basic rule is that you can
put inside curly brackets in a summary
view anything that you can type on
the GDB command line and execute.
That means any C or C++ arithmetic
expression and any function calls,
function calls within your application,
method calls on your objects,
or system calls to the Carbon framework.
This is very, very powerful.
Those are evaluated every time
that that variable is displayed.
So every step, it's going to see if the
variable's value has changed,
and if it has,
it's going to reevaluate that expression.
So you've got to be a
little careful about this,
because it's going to
be reevaluated very,
very frequently.
So don't make your expressions too
complex or too lengthy to execute,
and make sure you don't call
anything with side effects,
for example,
because this is actually executing
in the context of your application,
in your application's process space,
in your application's memory space,
and anything that this
application does can affect,
anything this expression does
can affect your application.
There are a couple of utility variables
that you can use in this expression.
$var is the thing itself,
the thing that's being evaluated.
So you can just do, you know,
curly brace $var.
and then get at members of it,
or you can call methods on
that by $var arrow or whatever.
And then for convenience, $parent,
if you're viewing a class
member or a struct member,
$parent, if you're viewing a class
that $parent is its owner.
So if you're drilling
down inside something,
but you need reference to a sibling,
for example,
you can do that by $parent and
then referring off the sibling,
or you can get at information
in the parent itself.
That's very useful.
The third thing that you
can -- are you ready?
Sort of.
Okay.
If we can go back to Chris's machine,
we'll show --
Okay, so I still haven't been able to get
the custom data formatters to work,
but what I will show
you is the third thing,
which is stepping through template code.
So we're stopped here
in our own function,
and you'll notice that we
were called from four each.
Oh!
So... Wait, wait, wait, Chris.
What?
I've got it.
You do?
Remove the custom data formatter I threw
in right before the demo from the custom
data formatters folder and try again.
You bastard.
Really folks, I was trying to improve the
quality of experience of the demo.
Oh, okay, where is it?
We'll show you how to install
custom data formatters.
Library folder.
Application Support, Apple,
Developer Tools, Custom Data Views,
C-List Plugin.Bundle, yeah,
just drag those to the trash.
Quit and reopen Xcode and try again.
I was up here until five minutes
before the presentation started
trying to debug something that
many of you requested yesterday.
I want to show you.
I'll show you the source code,
but I'm not going to show you it
working because it crashes Xcode.
Okay, so let's try this again.
So we stopped in transform.
We want to see the actual
value of this string.
So let's see if this works this time.
var.cstr, function call.
Aha, now it works.
Mayor Cooper, Mayor Maxima Cooper.
Okay.
So that's all fun.
So now, like I said,
we were actually called from 4Each,
so we'd like to see what's
going on up one level.
So let's remove this breakpoint
so we don't keep hitting it.
And if we just step out, ooh,
template function.
And we can just--
Step through this.
Now, again,
we've got sort of a similar problem here,
except this one is even more complicated.
I'd like to see the thing
that first points to.
This is an iterator, and again,
this is another obscure structure
that has all sorts of weird bits
that I really don't understand.
But custom data formatters
can deal with these too,
even though it's a template type.
So let's see.
Starvar.
And there it is.
So we can see this changing and getting
uppercased as we step through the loop.
Thank you.
Okay, back to the slides please.
So we've shown you the two kinds
of custom data view formulas.
First, the simple member access,
and then second, the function call.
And the function calls are very powerful.
They can work within your application.
They can work on template types.
They can work on C++ classes.
They're really powerful.
But there's one more thing
that's even more powerful,
so powerful that it'll bring
down Xcode if you do it wrong.
[Transcript missing]
So here's a simple example of one.
This is the custom data viewer for--
this is the actual code of the data
viewer for a Carbon handle inside
the Carbon data viewer's package.
There are really two parts to this.
One is the plist entry,
and the other is the library code.
And in the top is the plist entry.
All you see-- it's basically the
invocation of the library code,
the bundle code,
with the variable and the ID.
And that's all.
Very straightforward.
And then the library code--
the first two lines are to
get me access to my callbacks.
There's a special variable called
PBXGDBPluginFunctions that when
Xcode debugger loads my plugin,
it plugs in a pointer to an array of
callback functions into that static.
And then I jump through that in
order to get to my callbacks.
And then you see my function,
the data viewer's Carbon handle,
expects to get a handle and the ID.
It checks to see whether
the handle's valid,
because I don't want to do anything like
jumping through zero if I don't have to.
And if it is,
then I essentially Sprintf through
this function to print the size of
the handle by calling getHandleSize,
which is usually pretty safe.
Then I check the Hget state and
mask it against the lock bit,
and depending upon the state of that,
I Sprintf lock or unlock.
So this way, whenever I see a handle in
my debugger data viewer,
I get its size and its state of
whether it's locked or unlocked.
And if it's null or
the handle is invalid,
then I get invalid.
So this is a very simple data viewer.
And we have built in a lot of
these for the foundation classes,
and we have built in a lot
of these for Carbon classes.
And if Chris is willing to come up again,
Then he's going to
show you some of these,
again in Appearance Sample,
which has a little more
support for these things.
So we're going to bring up
Appearance Sample in the debugger.
and he's going to set a breakpoint
and I think that we figured
out proxy-dialog.cp line 106?
and I think we're getting... - Continue,
that's the assert.
- Okay.
That's the assert we
introduced in the first step.
Just keep continuing.
If you are bugged by asserts,
stop it and I'll show
you how to turn this off.
You have this turned on.
So, stop?
Right.
Project-- no, go to Executables,
turn down Executables, Appearance Sample,
double-click, scroll down-- yeah.
No, double-click.
You were there.
Scroll down.
Break on calls to debugger debugster.
Uncheck that box.
And that makes your certs
not break in the debugger.
We gave them something additional,
unplanned.
There you go.
OK, so go find proxydialog.cp.
And go to line 106.
It should be a command
key to go to a line.
which is invalid now for some reason.
Yeah, I used to know what it was.
Well, it says it's Command-L,
but it doesn't let you do it
right now for some reason.
Yes, now it does.
Focusing problem.
106.
And hey, we've got a breakpoint there.
Great, that's all we need.
So then go back to the application.
And we're going to pull up Window Proxy
and click the Add Proxy FS spec.
And pick a file, any file,
don't tell me what it is.
That's fine.
That's.
And we should hit our
breakpoint in the debugger.
There we go.
Now, notice a couple of things.
FS, the file spec variable,
the summary is the name of the file.
That's very useful.
Turn down the file spec and see
what you could see otherwise.
Well there's the V refnum
and the parent ID.
Those are nice.
But the name, it's a str_255.
Or it's a str_64 which is not a str_255,
which we haven't wired up.
But just turning it up and seeing
just the name and the file spec,
that's very nice.
See also, err is no error.
Just change that to
like -39 or something.
And now it says EOF error.
So it'll show you what your errors are.
Like I said,
it knows all 1,900 errors that
are in the Carbon headers,
and that's through a
1,900-case switch statement.
But the next thing, though,
you know that Nav Services returns
your file spec in an AE desk.
Well, isn't this interesting?
Look at the file spec desk,
and it says it's a type FSS.
Okay?
So it tells me what type the
desk is right at the top.
Now, if I turn it down,
it'll show me that it's a type FSS,
and that's the contents of it.
Yeah.
When you turn down AEDesk,
it goes and gets the data out of the
AEDesk and then displays it in that line,
but it only does that
when you turn it down,
so it's not expensive unless you
really want to see the contents.
And it does this with the $parent
variable I told you about earlier.
It goes back to its parent
to get its descriptor type,
which is not an OS type, it's an int,
unfortunately, so it doesn't show up as
a four-character code.
But you also see unused
keyword down at the bottom,
if you could select that, Chris.
That's an OS type,
and instead of showing up as a
long decimal or a hex number,
it shows up as four characters
in the variable view.
That's something we've put for
Carbon debugging in Xcode for you.
Okay?
So that's custom data viewers.
If we have a little time at the end,
I'll show you how to construct a data
viewer bundle that crashes Xcode,
because that's what I've
got to show you right now.
And we're working on some better
samples for this to post on the web.
But what we've implemented
in the Carbon data viewers
is all of the file types,
alias, FS spec, FS ref.
We've implemented the AEDesk types.
We've implemented inspectors for all
of the opaque HI toolbox references.
Window shows you its name and position.
Menu shows you its title.
HI object shows you what
kind of HI object it is.
And then we've implemented
the file types.
We've implemented the identifier.
We've implemented basic supports
for the Carbon events that shows you
the event class and the event name.
For Apple events, the same thing,
the event class and the event name,
if it's a known Apple event
and the four character code,
if it's not.
And just a whole bunch of things.
All the date time things show up as date
times instead of 64-bit decimal numbers.
So I think you'll find when
you're debugging in Xcode,
your familiar Carbon data
types show up as the values.
You think of them as rather than the
value that GDB thinks of them as.
And I think you'll find
that that's very powerful.
Okay, back to the slides, please.
Now I spoke a little about Carbon events
and a little bit about Apple events.
Now Carbon events and
Apple events are large things.
They're large and they're complex,
and we couldn't fit them into single
lines in the debugger display.
There are some things that you can do
when debugging a Carbon application
to see what's happening with your
Carbon events and with your Apple events,
other than just to see the class
and the particular event type.
Right now, they're accessible only via
the GDB-style interface because
they stream a lot of text.
We're going to try to find a way to
integrate that experience better,
to do a little better logging of it,
but for now I want to give you
some pointers on how to do this.
There's a function for Carbon events
called setEventTraceEnabled.
That is, once again,
it's one of these GDB calls
from the GDB command line
into the Carbon framework.
And that gives you exhaustive information
on what Carbon events are happening.
There's some similar
things that you can do.
There's environment variables you can set
to turn on and off Apple event debugging,
and we'll show those too.
Those are done with environment
variables rather than with the call.
And the output of both of these
goes to the standard I/O window,
which is available in the console
drawer and also available,
highly recommended you do this,
as a separate window in
the Xcode environment.
As I said, for Apple events,
there are two environment
variables you can set.
AEDebugSends will print out
any event that you send,
and AEDebugReceives will print out any
event that your application receives.
There are also some functions
you can call from GDB.
If you want to see a full AEDesk
rather than just the summary,
if it happens to be a
custom one of yours,
GDB.printAEDesk will print that desk.
And if you want to know more about this,
we've even put in a function called
GDB.printHelpDebuggingAppleEvents,
which spools some help
text to standard out.
And then you can read that and
follow the instructions in it.
So let's show you those.
Are we still in Appearance Sample?
Yep.
We should remove those breakpoints.
Already done.
Great.
And have you set up the
AEDebugReceives environment variable?
Partly.
There it is.
An environment variable you can
either set up in the shell before
you launch your application in GDB,
or you can set it here in the Xcode API.
Just create it, check the box,
set the value, and then when your
application is launched,
the shell that launches that application
has that environment variable set.
That makes it very convenient.
So we're going to run
this application again,
and the first thing we're going to
do is to throw an Apple event at it.
And my favorite way to throw
Apple events at an application
is by using AppleScript.
I'm going to show the run log first,
so we get to see when it shows up.
Clean, pristine, empty run log.
Now Chris has written a
simple AppleScript here.
I'm sure you had to hit the
books to learn how to do this.
And he's going to run the script,
and he's going to send--
Hmm.
That's the error we expected,
but we're not-- The error is expected.
The absence of the run log is not.
Is not.
No, not underscore.
I did turn this on.
"Did you have any problems running
against the debug version?"
"We didn't in rehearsal."
We'll try that suggestion.
Fine, we'll show you the Carbon spew.
Or that... He's going to turn on a debug,
just to make sure.
Send the Apple event.
And still no joy.
I can't tell you what I broke this time,
but it's obviously not your fault.
It worked in rehearsal.
All right.
Okay.
There it is.
Is that?
Oh.
No, it's there.
It's just not in the run log.
Oh.
Oh, it's not in the run log.
Chris, it's in standard I/O.
Show STD I/O.
There it is.
Oh, okay.
My mistake.
We were looking in the wrong place.
It was there all the time.
So here are all the multiple events that
Chris was sending to the application.
And when he turned on AE debugging,
it gives you even more information
for what handlers it's looking for,
what tables it's looking
for the handlers in,
and what order it's looking for them in.
So if your Apple event handlers
are firing in an unexpected order,
or the wrong ones are firing,
turn on AE debug 1 in your
environment variables,
and this information is
logged to the output.
This is very useful if you've got a
scriptable application in figuring out
what Apple script sends you or what other
applications send you in terms of events.
And once again,
it comes up in the standard I/O log,
just like it says on
our sheet right here,
not in the run log.
Another thing that comes up in the
standard I/O log is the Carbon debugging,
Carbon Events debugging spew.
So what Chris is doing now in
the little GDB terminal window is
he's calling setEventTraceEnabled
It's just parin parin, but I guess... No,
it's not.
It's not?
You tested it?
Okay.
We'll talk about that later.
So now that he's set the
event tracing enabled,
when we go back to the application,
and start doing things that
cause Carbon events to get sent.
We see a large amount of diagnostic
information about what Carbon events
are being sent to whom and when,
with what arguments, who's handling them,
and what happens as a result of it.
Sending event, called handler,
event was handled, leaving target,
send event to event target entered.
It is more information
than you probably need.
But if you are trying to
debug your Carbon events,
this is the first tool to use because
it shows you explicitly step-by-step
everything that is happening.
Okay.
And I think that that's
all for the demos.
[Transcript missing]
But I hear you say,
but I like CodeWarrior IDE debugging.
Well, this is a lot more valid,
because CodeWarrior IDE has
a lot more windows that do
useful and interesting things.
Interestingly enough,
when you're debugging
Mac OS with CodeWarrior,
it's using GDB for a lot of the
underlying machinery to step
and to control the execution
flow of the application,
though it's using its own functions to
get the symbolics information and to
display the variables and stack traces.
These debugging entry points are
available from CodeWarrior expressions,
too.
So all the things that we've showed
you from the GDB command line,
those are available from the
CodeWarrior IDE debugger as well,
if you happen to be using that.
And if you like Zone Ranger for
Memory Diagnostics tool,
well, you know,
Zone Ranger really is great
for debugging heap zones,
and heap zones are just not that
relevant in Mac OS X anymore.
In order to really understand what's
going on in Mac OS X memory management,
it's less of a static looking at
what's happening in my heap zone,
and more of a dynamic looking
at who's calling Malik and when,
and are these things
getting released in time,
and by whom, and on what threads.
And some of the Mac OS tools like
Malik Debug and like Sampler's
Memory Allocation Viewer,
those are much,
much more relevant to debugging
Mac OS X memory problems than
static views of your heap like
Zone Ranger and Is My Heap Fragmented
or Has My Heap Been Stepped On are.
Memory diagnostics with Carbon, you know,
new pointer and new handle
just get down and call malloc.
So if you debug with malloc,
you're debugging new
pointer and new handle.
That's really the important
thing to remember.
Your handles are just
not going to move around,
so this whole class of problems
that you used to do on Mac OS 9,
they just don't exist anymore on 10.
Your low-level memory handling code is
not going to be called because until
you hit that 4-gig barrier and on a G5,
not even then, you're not going to be
asked to compact your heap.
It's just not going to happen.
Your big problem will be leaks,
scribbling on your own allocations,
you know,
getting a wrong pointer somewhere,
and trying to use something
after you've freed it.
And those are things that the
malloc debug tools and the sampler
tools are really good at doing.
So let's summarize.
We've gone through a lot of
stuff on Carbon debugging.
You've seen the C++ exception handling,
the throw and break on
throw and break on catch.
You've seen stepping through templates
and using custom data views in order
to see the contents of templates,
which is very useful.
You've seen some built-in
Carbon and foundation data viewers
that show you your Carbon data
types in a very familiar way.
You've seen how to build your own either
with a simple member access or with a
complex expression or even with a bundle
of code that you write yourself and drop
in to do your own custom data viewers.
We hope that you'll be able
to use some of these tools in
debugging your Carbon applications.
We will be down in the Van Ness room
to help you get up on Xcode and get
your projects on Xcode so you can
take advantage of some of these tools.
We'll be there for the rest of the day.
And we're going to bring.
Up God for did you go.
We've got actually a lot more to
talk about before I call up God free
because I've got 18 minutes and
I'm not going to let you be bored.
We've got a lot in Xcode right
now in the developer release.
In the 1.0, the features you've seen
are going to be polished,
and they're not going to crash,
and they're going to be
a little more robust.
That's what 1.0 is about.
We know what you need.
We know you need a more
flexible type-viewing system.
We get very spoiled by using the
Code Warrior view-anything-as-any-type
system,
and by the Code Warrior memory viewer.
That's our aim.
We're working on it.
It won't be in the 1.0,
but it should be in the
next release after that.
That's certainly on our list.
Getting these tracing tools to
debug more voluminous things,
getting them built into the IDE so you
don't have to spool them out to another
text window and then scroll through it,
that's another priority.
We're going to work on that to find
a better integration of those tools.
Of course,
we can never step or view too quickly.
We've got the problem now
of the more data you want.
You want to see the slower you step,
and so there's a tipping point
there between fidelity of
data and speed of stepping.
One of the things you can do is you
can turn off custom data views while
you're stepping and then turn it on
again in order to look at the values.
That, we've found,
is a useful compromise.
And then watchpoints and event points.
We know those are very important to you.
We're working on those.
You can do those at the
low-level GDB command line.
We're working on bringing them
up into the IDE interface.
[Transcript missing]
The Reference Library.
Go to the CD set and see the
presentation from last night on basic
debugging to go deep into the generic
debugging capabilities of GDB.
Go to the Debugger Services reference
in the Carbon Performance Directory.
There's a lot of information
on debugging with GDB,
GDB internals.
The GDB release notes
are always very helpful.
Quinn's tech note is very helpful.
And here's the Carbon Tips and
Tricks document.
It's at
developer.apple.com/carbon/tipsandtricks.
html.
It's a very long document
with a lot of things,
including all of those APIs,
the names we called,
to print out diagnostics
from the Carbon frameworks.
It's a very, very useful technical note.
If you haven't used it before,
the Chud Toolkit is an incredibly useful
set of tools for doing machine-level,
instruction-level debugging
of what your performance
profile of your application is.
There have been a couple
of demos so far this week,
and you can go back to the
DVD set and watch those.
Or on your Developer Tools CD,
open up the Chud Tools package
and install them,
and just see what miracles
they can show you in your code.